CNV-40007: Added AAQ Operator docs (#83412)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/virt-about-aaq-operator.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * virt/virtual_machines/advanced_vm_management/virt-understanding-aaq-operator.adoc              

:_mod-docs-content-type: CONCEPT                                    
[id="virt-about-aaq-operator_{context}"]                                   
= About the AAQ Operator

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> The AAQ Operator provides more flexible and extensible quota management compared to the native `ResourceQuota` object in the {product-title} platform.

Reviewer: Should AAQ be expanded on every first-use instance in a module?

Author: I don't see the need to spell it out in every module. Thanks for the suggestion.

In a multi-tenant cluster environment, where multiple workloads operate on shared infrastructure and resources, using the Kubernetes native `ResourceQuota` object to limit aggregate CPU and memory consumption presents infrastructure overhead and live migration challenges for {VirtProductName} workloads. 

> {VirtProductName} requires significant compute resource allocation to handle virtual machine (VM) live migrations and manage VM infrastructure overhead. When upgrading {VirtProductName}, it is necessary to migrate VMs to upgrade the `virt-launcher` pod. However, migrating a VM in the presence of a resource quota can cause the migration to fail and subsequently cause the upgrade to fail. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{VirtProductName} requires significant compute resource allocation to handle virtual machine (VM) live migrations and manage VM infrastructure overhead. When upgrading {VirtProductName}, you must migrate VMs to upgrade the `virt-launcher` pod. However, migrating a VM in the presence of a resource quota can cause the migration, and subsequently the upgrade, to fail. 
```

> With AAQ, you can allocate resources for VMs without interfering with cluster-level activities such as upgrades and node maintenance. The AAQ Operator also supports non-compute resources. This eliminates the need to manage both the native resource quota and AAQ API objects separately.

Reviewer: Ambiguous pronoun. 

"This [something] eliminates the need..."

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> With AAQ, you can allocate resources for VMs without interfering with cluster-level activities such as upgrades and node maintenance. The AAQ Operator also supports non-compute and non-schedulable resources. This eliminates the need to manage both the native resource quota and AAQ API objects separately.

Reviewer 2: I think that non-compute is enough, no need to add the non-schedulable.

> .AAQ Operator controller and custom resources

Reviewer: Is this section really a small reference module?

Author: I think it has conceptual information as well that binds it with the "About the AAQ Operator" module. I have changed the section title to a level 1 heading.

The AAQ Operator introduces two new API objects defined as custom resource definitions (CRDs) for managing alternative quota implementations across multiple namespaces:

> * `ApplicationAwareResourceQuota`: Sets aggregate quota restrictions enforced per namespace. The `ApplicationAwareResourceQuota` API is compatible with the native `ResourceQuota` object and shares the same specification and status definitions.

Reviewer: Though it's indeed an annoying pattern to reproduce, I think these might scan better as H3s. Just a thought.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion, prefer to keep the formatting as is

+
.Example manifest
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: aaq.kubevirt.io/v1alpha1
kind: ApplicationAwareResourceQuota
metadata:
  name: example-resource-quota
spec:
  hard:
    requests.memory: 1Gi 
    limits.memory: 1Gi
    requests.cpu/vmi: "1" # <1>
    requests.memory/vmi: 1Gi # <2>
# ...
----

> <1> For all pods in a non-terminal state that have VM workloads, the minimum amount of CPU that is reserved for the VM container.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<1> The maximun amount of CPU allowed for VM workloads in the default namespace.
```

> <2> For all pods in a non-terminal state that have VM workloads, the minimum amount of RAM that is reserved for the VM container.

Reviewer 2: The maximun amount of RAM allowed for VM workloads in the default namespace.

> * `ApplicationAwareClusterResourceQuota`: Mirrors the `ApplicationAwareResourceQuota` object at a cluster scope. It is compatible with the native `ClusterResourceQuota` API object and shares the same specification and status definitions. AAQ cluster quotas are not namespaced. When creating an AAQ cluster quota, you can select multiple namespaces based on annotation selection, label selection, or both by editing the `spec.selector.labels` or `spec.selector.annotations` fields.

Reviewer 3: I find this sentence "AAQ cluster quotas are not namespace." confusing. Perhaps it's not needed? We already said that this is a cluster object.

+
.Example manifest
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: aaq.kubevirt.io/v1alpha1
kind: ApplicationAwareClusterResourceQuota # <1>
metadata:
  name: example-resource-quota
spec:
  quota:
    hard:
    requests.memory: 1Gi
    limits.memory: 1Gi
    requests.cpu/vmi: "1"
    requests.memory/vmi: 1Gi
  selector:
    annotations: null
    labels:
      matchLabels:
        kubernetes.io/metadata.name: default
# ...
----
<1> You can only create an `ApplicationAwareClusterResourceQuota` object if the `spec.allowApplicationAwareClusterResourceQuota` field in the `HyperConverged` custom resource (CR) is set to `true`.
+
[NOTE]
====

> If both `spec.selector.labels` and `spec.selector.annotations` fields are set, only namespaces that match both labels are selected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If both `spec.selector.labels` and `spec.selector.annotations` fields are set, only namespaces that match both are selected.
```

Reviewer 3: it could be both `criteria`

> If both `spec.selector.labels` and`spec.selector.annotations` fields are set, only namespaces that match both are selected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If both `spec.selector.labels` and `spec.selector.annotations` fields are set, only namespaces that match both are selected.
```

====

> The AAQ controller uses a scheduling gate mechanism to evaluate whether there is enough of a resource available to run a VM pod. If so, the scheduling gate is removed from the pod and it is considered ready for scheduling. The quota usage status is updated to indicate how much of the quota is used. If the CPU and memory requests and limits for the VM pod exceed the enforced quota usage limit, pod creation fails.

Reviewer 2: > The AAQ controller uses a scheduling gate mechanism to evaluate whether there is enough of a resource available to run a VM pod

To run a vm workload or another workload

 > If the CPU and memory requests and limits for the VM pod exceed the enforced quota usage limit, pod creation fails.

 If the CPU and memory requests and limits for the workload exceed the enforced quota usage limit, pod won't be scheduled until there is enough quota.

> The AAQ controller uses a scheduling gate mechanism to evaluate whether there is enough of a resource available to run a workload. If so, the scheduling gate is removed from the pod and it is considered ready for scheduling. The quota usage status is updated to indicate how much of the quota is used. If the CPU and memory requests and limits for the workload exceed the enforced quota usage limit, the pod is not scheduled and remains in `SchedulingGated` status until there is enough quota available.

Reviewer 2: If there isnt enough quota an event is created with details regarding why it exceed the quota

> The AAQ controller uses a scheduling gate mechanism to evaluate whether there is enough of a resource available to run a workload. If so, the scheduling gate is removed from the pod and it is considered ready for scheduling. The quota usage status is updated to indicate how much of the quota is used. If the CPU and memory requests and limits for the workload exceed the enforced quota usage limit, the pod is not scheduled and remains in `SchedulingGated` status until there is enough quota available.

Reviewer 3: The scheduling gate mechanism is new and I'm not sure how many people know about it.
Do we have a reference to it anywhere?

Author: What about this [API reference doc](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/rest_api/workloads_apis/pod-v1.html#spec-schedulinggates)? 

The OpenShift Container Platform documentation has an entire [section on pod scheduling](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/nodes/scheduling/nodes-scheduler-about.html) but there is no mention of scheduling gates.

Author: @Barakmor1 Any thoughts on which doc to link to?

Reviewer 2: [is](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/rest_api/workloads_apis/pod-v1.html#spec-schedulinggates) is better, in u/s docs we used official k8s docs as reference but i'm not sure if we are allowed to do it here

Author: Sounds good. Yeah, we don't typically link to upstream docs as reference.

Reviewer 2: The PR looks good to me, just missing this link.

Author: I have added the link in the "Additional resources" section. Unfortunately, due to tooling limitations we cannot add cross references in a module type file.

Here's the latest preview: https://83412--ocpdocs-pr.netlify.app/openshift-enterprise/latest/virt/virtual_machines/advanced_vm_management/virt-understanding-aaq-operator.html#virt-configuring-aaq-operator_virt-understanding-aaq-operator

Reviewer 2: I couldnt find it in the "Additional resources" section.

Author: It's the 5th item in the list. Should I change the link text to "Pod scheduling gate specification"?

Reviewer 2: See https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/83412#discussion_r1806429284

> The AAQ controller uses a scheduling gate mechanism to evaluate whether there is enough of a resource available to run a workload. If so, the scheduling gate is removed from the pod and it is considered ready for scheduling. The quota usage status is updated to indicate how much of the quota is used. If the CPU and memory requests and limits for the workload exceed the enforced quota usage limit, the pod is not scheduled and remains in `SchedulingGated` status until there is enough quota available. An error message is displayed with details on why the quota was exceeded.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The AAQ controller uses a scheduling gate mechanism to evaluate whether there is enough of a resource available to run a workload. If so, the scheduling gate is removed from the pod and it is considered ready for scheduling. The quota usage status is updated to indicate how much of the quota is used. If the CPU and memory requests and limits for the workload exceed the enforced quota usage limit, the pod is not scheduled and remains in `SchedulingGated` status until there is enough quota available. An event with details on why the quota was exceeded will get created.
```

Reviewer 2: Please feel free to use clearer language. I think the current text is a bit misleading. As I understand it, if there isn't enough quota, the pod won't fail right away.
 Instead, the pod will be created but will stay in a "ScheduleGated" status. To find out why it wasn't scheduled, users will need to check the events from the cluster.

Author: @Barakmor1 What type of event is created? A `FailedScheduling` event? Will it be helpful to link to [this doc](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/nodes/clusters/nodes-containers-events.html)?

Reviewer 4: it is a Warning, here example: 

```
6s          Warning   Warning            pod/virt-launcher-vm-fedora-4zhqc          exceeded quota: example-arq, requested: requests.cpu/vmi=1, used: requests.cpu/vmi=1, limited: requests.cpu/vmi=1
```

Reviewer 2: The type is warning.
The object is the pod.

[IMPORTANT]
====

> Pods that have the `spec.nodeName` field set to schedule them on a specific node cannot use a namespace where the AAQ resource quotas are defined.

Reviewer 2: It's not where the aaq quotas are defined, it's in the namespaces that match the namespace selector defined in HCO for AAQ

> Pods that have the `spec.nodeName` field set to schedule them on a specific node cannot use a namespace for which an AAQ scheduling gate is added in the `HyperConverged` CR.

Reviewer 3: Could we somehow simplify this statement so it will be very clear?

What do you think about the following: "Pods with the spec.nodeName field set for a specific node, cannot use namespaces managed by an AAQ, as defined in the HyperConverged CR."

Reviewer 2: I agree, it should be very clear that pods creation in namespaces that match the label selector in HCO will get rejected

Author: @Barakmor1 How about "Pods that have the `spec.nodeName` field set to a specific node cannot use namespaces that match the `spec.namespaceSelector` labels defined in the `HyperConverged` CR."

Reviewer 2: Sounds good to me :)
